
# A Catalogue Of Spoke Patterns

## Contents

* [Summary](#summary)
* [Catalogue](#catalogue)
* [Notes](#notes)
  * [Pattern Names](#pattern-names)
    * [Spoke Offsets](#spoke-offsets)
    * [Pattern Groups](#pattern-groups)
    * [Pattern Lengths](#pattern-lengths)
    * [Preferred Names](#preferred-names)
  * [Safety And Practicality](#safety-and-practicality)
  * [Completeness](#completeness)
  * [Footnotes](#footnotes)

## Summary

This will be a [complete](#complete) catalogue of all spoke patterns
to [length N](#pattern-lengths).  There is no guarantee of [safety or
practicality](#safety-and-practicality) - in fact, **some patterns are
unsafe or impractical**.

## Catalogue

Catalogue will go here

## Notes

### Pattern Names

To write this software and organise the results into the catalogue
above I have had to invent some terms.  My apologies if these are
confusing, or replace / conflict with existing usage.

#### Spoke Offsets

We can describe spokes as being offset by some number of holes
relative to where a radial spoke would connect to the rim.  A spoke of
"offset 1" is shifted one place to the right (in practice, that is two
rim holes, because the intermediate hole is used to connected to the
other side of the hub).  A negative offset is the same number of holes
in the opposite direction.

So a traditional 3 Cross pattern has spokes with offset 3 and -3,
while a radially spoked wheel has spokes of offset 0.

#### Pattern Lengths

Practical spoke patterns repeat around the wheel, so instead of
describing the whole wheel we can describe just a single occurence of
the pattern - a single "slice of the pie".

The number of spokes in the slice is called the *length* of the
pattern (see [rim compatability](#rim-compatibility)).

Soemtimes I will use the word "pattern" to refer to an entire wheel,
and sometimes to just the "pie slice".  Hopefully this will be clear
from the context.

#### Pattern Groups

I describe spoke patterns in three groups:

* **Group A**: Patterns where 

#### Radial Postfix


#### Preferred Names

Many patterns can have more than one name.  For example, you could
describe a traditional 3 Cross pattern as "3A", "3B0", "3,-3C" or even
"3,-3,3,-3C" etc.

To avoid duplication I use the following rules:

* Always prefer group A over B, and B over C.

* Except for the 0A radial pattern, omit leading and trailing radial
  (0 offset) spokes for groups A and B (these can be described using
  the [postfix](#radial-postfix).

* Always start with a positive offset (any pattern can be "reversed"
  by changing the sign of all offsets - this is equivalent to lcaing
  the pattern anti-clockwise instead of clockwise).

### Rim Compatability

A pattern of length N can be used in any wheel with a multiple of 2N
spoke holes, providing the crosses are
possible<sup>[2](#footnote-2)</sup>.  So a pattern of length 3 (like
Crow's Foot) can be used with 36 hole rims, and a pattern of length 2
(like 3 Cross) can be used with pretty much any rim as long as the hub
can accomodate the spoke angles.

The illustrations typically show 32 hole rims, unless that is
incompatible with a particular pattern.

### Safety And Practicality

The patterns shown here are generated by a computer program that
considers every possible combination **without considering how safe
or practical the design may be**.

Safe, practical spoke designs distribute forces (from tension,
acceleration, braking and collisions) evenly around the rim.  The
appropriate choice of pattern for a wheel will depend on many
different factors and **should be made by an expert wheelbuilder**.

One practical issue I would like to describe in more detail is
unbalanced rotation.  For example, a radially spoked wheel is "the
same" as one where all the spokes are offset by one hole - when you
actually build the wheel with offset spokes (ignoring problems with
spoke length) the spokes would tighten until they were radial.

So, to be included in the catalogue, patterns which have spokes offset
in one direction must also have at least one spoke offset in the
opposite direction.  This excludes the most obvious problems but still
allows patterns where rotational forces in the two directions are
carried by different numbers of spokes (because these patterns are not
symmetrical they are all group C).

### Completeness

This catalogue is restricted to:

* A single wheel side.  The illustrations show spokes at both sides of
  the wheel, but I do not consider different relative offsets of the
  two sides, or even using a different pattern on each side.

* Straight spokes.  I have not included "snowflake" patterns and
  other, similar designs where spokes are wrapped around each other.

* Completely spoked wheels.  I have not considered gaps / missing
  spokes.

* Patterns where, going round the rim, spokes alternate from one side
  of the hub to the other (many rims are drilled to reflect this
  practice).  See [spoke offsets](#spoke-offsets).

* Spoke offsets of 4 (or less).

* Patterns of length N (or less).

Apart from these limitations, the catalogue should be complete as it
is generated by a computer program that searches for all
possibilities.  If you find a pattern that is missing please contact
me as it may mean I have a bug in my program!

### Footnotes

**<a name="footnote-1">1</a>** - More exactly, a lexical sorting based
on numerical values, but where negative values come later.  More
exactly still, please see the code.

**<a name="footnote-2">2</a>** - I think this can be shown using
[modular
arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modular_arithmetic).
